---
title: Divine Intervention in Western Epic
tags: [epic, myth, divinity, literature]
date: 2020-11-27
permalink: /divine-intervention-in-western-epic/
---
Throughout the history of western literature, divine intervention has
been a common theme. This is particularly apparent in the genre of epic
poetry, where gods, heroes, and normal humans all interact. In the
ancient Greek and Roman epics of the *Odyssey* and *Aeneid*, the
pantheon of gods often intervenes on behalf of their favorite people.
Long after the Christianization of the West, John Milton's epic
*Paradise Lost* would show the nature of divinity from a Protestant
Christian perspective. The most important difference between all of
these epics is their view of divinity: the *Odyssey* shows gods as
exceptionally powerful beings with little transcendence over humanity,
the *Aeneid* shows a similar view but with Fate as an additional force,
and *Paradise Lost* shows a single, omnipotent God who fulfills the
roles of both the Greek intervener and the Roman Fate in a single Being.

In the Greek *Odyssey¸* Homer's presentation of divine intervention
centers around the concept of a patron god or goddess, who bestows
particular favor on a person. Of course, a divinity may also be hostile to a
certain person. Divine treatement of mortals frames the conflict which drives much of the entire
plot of the story.{.dropcap}

Athena is Odysseus' patron goddess. She often intervenes for him by
interceding for him to the other gods. For example, the poem, beginning
*in medias res* with a council of gods debating what to do with
Odysseus, frames the conflict of the book with her *pathos*-charged
appeal to the other gods to allow Odysseus to return home: "But such
desire is in him/merely to see the hearthsmoke leaping upward/from his
own island, that he longs to die."[^1] This both emphasizes how much
Athena cares about Odysseus and frames the book with the theme of
returning home with a goddess' help. She, of course, has a reason for
her fondness for Odysseus: she finds a sense of comradeship with him
because both she and he are tricksters, saying "Two of a kind, we
are/contrivers, both."[^2] Thus, she is quite loyal to his cause,
viewing it with a sort of personal interest.

Not only does she persuade the gods to allow Odysseus to return home,
but she also acts to cause his return to happen, intervening in the
physical world. This theme weaves throughout the book. For example, when
Odysseus is going to the palace of Alkínoös, Athena hides him in fog[^3]
and leads him there in disguise.[^4] She also uses her power to change
people's emotions to be more open to him; for Odysseus to get help from
Alkínoös, he needs to be able to speak with his daughter, who Athena
"\[gives\] a bold heart"[^5] so that she may be be able to talk with him.
Additionally, Athena modifies Odysseus' appearance on many occasions.
When he was going to meet Alkínoös, she made him "taller, and massive
too, with crisping hair/in curls like petals of wild hyacinth,/but all
red-golden...just so she lavished/beauty over Odysseus' head and
shoulders."[^6] She also changes his appearance when he is returning
home and stays at his swineherd Eumaios's hut, temporarily disguising
him as a beggar.[^7]

Athena's favor also extends to Odysseus's son
Telémakhos. Athena, disguised as a friend in order to guide Telémakhos,
tells him that "the gods were never indifferent to your life."[^8] This
favor is important to Athena's status as Odysseus' patroness, because
familial relationships were considered quite important in Greek culture;
this can be seen when Zeus describes Ithaca as "\[Odysseus\] father's
country;"[^9] any patron would also wish goodwill on the child of the
patronee.

Poseidon, on the other hand dislikes Odysseus. His dislike of Odysseus
stems from Odysseus' blinding the cyclops Polyphêmos, Poseidon's
son.[^10] He constantly tries to prevent Odysseus from being able to
return home. The gods are thus in conflict: Zeus says that "Only.../Poseidon,
bears the fighter an old grudge/since he poked out the eye of
Polyphêmos,"[^11] but, (presumably because of the other divinities'
protection, "he does not kill the man;/he only buffets him away from
home."[^12] This "buffeting" is the subject of nearly all Odysseus'
sufferings and causes the protraction of his return that makes up the
substance of the plot.

In Virgil's *Aeneid*, the gods squabble much in the same way as in the
*Odyssey*. Like Odysseus, the main character Aeneas has a patron
goddess, Venus. Venus intercedes for Odysseus, begging Vulcan to assist
him in his fight to be able to settle in Italy.[^13] Just as in the
*Odyssey*, a goddess opposes this hero too; Juno opposes Aeneas, asking
Aeolus to try to foil Aeneas voyage to Italy, saying that "the race I
hate is crossing the Tuscan sea...Put new fury into your winds, and make
the long ships flounder,"[^14] which he does.[^15]{.dropcap}

In addition to the gods, however, Fate itself intervenes as a force.
Like Athena, it affects Aeneas' emotions; when Dido begged him to stay
with her in Carthage, "no tears moved him, no one's voice would he
/Attend to tractably. The fates apposed it;/God's will blocked the man's
once kindly ears."[^16] Similar to Odysseus' frequent acknowledgement of
the gods' assistance, Aeneas acknowledges the power of Fate, considering
it when deciding where to settle.[^17] However, Fate is not necessarily
fixed and unchangeable. When Venus begs Vulcan to help Aeneas, he says,
"If concern like this/Had moved you in the old days, even then/I might
have armed the Trojans lawfully---/For neither Jove almighty nor the
Fates/Forbade Troy to endure."[^18] This is interesting, as Fate clearly
plays a role in Aeneas' journey. Vulcan seems to almost present a
conflicting view of Fate as both strong and overpowering and changeable.
It seems that the Romans had conflicting ideas about the strength of
Fate, wavering between viewing it as a strong force that determines
destiny and something which changes, sometimes conflicting with the
gods. It is possible that this conflicting view in the ancient world may
have rendered many people more open to Christianity.

In contrast to both ancient epics, Milton's *Paradise Lost* portrays an
omnipotent God who exerts his will with the same force of will as Fate.
Milton came much later than these earlier authors and, as a Protestant
Christian, had significantly different viewpoints about divinity. While,
as a Christian, he would have discounted the existence of any sort of
pantheon, he decided instead to present God as filling all the
responsibilities and powers of the ancient pantheons, thus emphasizing
His omnipotence, which he further emphasizes opening by calling Him "the
Almighty Power."[^19] Additionally, God fills the same place as Fate in
the ancient epics, presenting a paradox between predestination and free will
which Milton seeks to resolve throughout the epic, writing that he
wishes to "justify the ways of God to men." [^20] Nevertheless, free
will of other characters does play a part, as God the Father asserts
that, "Freely they fell who fell, and stood who stood./Not free, what
proof could they have given sincere/Of true allegiance, constant faith
or love...What pleasure I from obedience paid,/When will and
reason...Made passive both, had serv'd necessity...?"[^21] In other
words, sovereign God created his creation with free will, because they
would not be able to glorify him without it.{.dropcap}

The conflict, unlike in the ancient epics where the heroes attempting
some goal have gods both for and against them, the Hero is Himself the
Son of God, who is God Himself.[^22] The conflict is then between God
and His creation, over which He holds absolute power. Raphael, an angel
and messenger of God, calls him "One Almighty...from whom/All things
proceed, and up to him return...."[^23] Satan, an angel who rebelled,
comes into conflict with God when he rebels, attempting to present
himself as a god. Milton writes of Satan's followers, "Towards him they
bend/with awful reverence prone, and as a god Extol him equal to the
Highest in Heaven."[^24] Satan himself refers to the rebel angels as "A
third part of the Gods, in synod met/Their deities to assert..."[^25],
encouraging his followers by inflating their hubris.

Thus, for purpose of comparison with the ancient epics, it seems
reasonable to see Milton as presenting angels somewhat as sub-deities
over whom God holds ultimate power. This literary treatment still
reveals the stark difference of the two religious systems: where the
pagan systems had deities as squabbling, independent powers, the
Christian system presents a single God as the originator and creator of
all other powers. The angels exert His will unless they choose to
disobey, which has dire consequences: Satan's rebellion doomed him and
his followers to "Hell...fraught with fire/Unquenchable, the house of
woe and pain."[^26] Despite having created these beings with free will,
God's sovereignty is still manifested in his judgement.

Like in ancient myth, Milton's God fulfills the role of an intercessor, the
Son interceding to the Father for mankind. Of Adam and Eve's repentant
prayers, Milton writes, "To Heaven their prayers/Flew up...then
clad/With incense, where the golden altar fumed,/By their great
intercessor, came in sight/Before the Father's throne: them the glad
Son/Presenting, thus to intercede began."[^27] In this passage, Milton
shows that the prayers were not worthy, requiring the Son to present the
requests. He chooses to use the word "clad" to allude to Adam and Eve's
clothing, to emphasize the imperfection of the prayers. Unlike in the
ancient epics, the prayers of people directly reach to the pinnacle of
divine power; the intercessor presents and enhances the prayers, while,
in the ancient epics, intercessors present a person's case themselves.
An additional difference from the ancient myths is that the Son
self-sacrifices as part of the intercession, saying "let me/Interpret
for \[Adam\]; me, his advocate/And propitiation; all his works on
me/Good, or not good, ingraft; my merit those/Shall perfect, and for
these my death shall pay."[^28] This type of propitious, redeeming
self-sacrifice is foreign to the ancient epics, which prefer to instead
focus on personal glory.

Throughout western history, views of the world have been expressed
through literature. One area where this is quite apparent is the views
of theology presented in epic poems. The Greek poet Homer's *Odyssey*
shows gods as powerful but non-transcendent, as does the Roman poet
Virgil's *Aeneid*, though Virgil adds a heavy-handed Fate; the English
Christian poet Milton, however, shows in *Paradise Lost* that the
Christian God is both like the Greek intercessor and the Roman Fate in
one omnipotent Being. God's omnipotence should bring all Christians
comfort because His is also loving, as we can see through His selfless
sacrifice and intercession. This ability to find comfort, rather than
fear, in the existence of the gods may have had significant influence on
the spread of Christianity. The Apostle Paul called this hope and
comfort of redemption "that blessed hope,"[^29] emphasizing the eternal
qualities of Christianity in a pagan world.{.dropcap}

## Bibliography

- Homer. *The Odyssey*. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1998.

- Milton, John. *Paradise Lost*. Digireads, 2016.

- Virgil. *The Aeneid*. New York, N.Y.: Vintage Books, 1990.

[^1]: Homer, *The Odyssey*, trans. Robert Fitzgerald (New York: Farrar,
    Straus and Giroux, 1998), 1.78-80.

[^2]: Homer, 13.379-380.

[^3]: Homer, 7.18.

[^4]: Homer, 7.22-23.

[^5]: Homer, 6.150-151.

[^6]: Homer, 6.244-250.

[^7]: Homer, 13.540-547.

[^8]: Homer, 3.33.

[^9]: Homer, 5.47.

[^10]: Homer, 9.548-585.

[^11]: Homer, 1.90-92.

[^12]: Homer, 1.97-98.

[^13]: Virgil, *The Aeneid* (New York, N.Y.: Vintage Books, 1990),
    8.491-515.

[^14]: Virgil, 1.94-98.

[^15]: Virgil, 1.107-130.

[^16]: Virgil, 4.607-609.

[^17]: Virgil, 7.159-161.

[^18]: Virgil, 8.530-534.

[^19]: John Milton, *Paradise Lost* (Digireads, 2016), 1.44.

[^20]: Milton, 1.26.

[^21]: Milton, 3.101-109.

[^22]: While Milton does not explicitly make the unity clear
    (indeed, separating them may be somewhat necessary to make the Son clearly the epic hero), the
    genre of the epic somewhat forces the writer to respect the
    audience's viewpoint, as the genre assumes that the audience
    anticipates the story. For Milton, his audience would have been
    Christians, who view the Son and the Father as the same essential
    being. John 10:30, Philippians 2:6.

[^23]: Milton, Paradise Lost, 5.469-470.

[^24]: Milton, 2.477-479.

[^25]: Milton, 6.156-157.

[^26]: Milton, 6.876-877.

[^27]: Milton, 11.14-21.

[^28]: Milton, 11.32-36.

[^29]: Titus 2:13 (King James Version).
