---
title: "Environment and the Importance of Confession in Crime and Punishment"
date: 2021-03-22
---
All good writers anticipate their opponents' arguments. Dostoevsky wrote
*Crime and Punishment* to defend Russian traditions from their critics.
One of these traditions was Christianity and its morals. Christianity is
a religion which places great influence on the necessity of confession
and justice in punishment. Dostoevsky shows his brilliance in writing by
creating an environment in the novel which would seemingly weaken his
emphasis on confession, only to demonstrate its practical, personal
importance. Dostoevsky shows that whether Raskolnikov was driven to his
crime by his environment has no significance in the moral necessity of
confession and punishment, as just punishment is necessary in the
redemptive process.

Christianity emphasizes personal responsibility for any sin, including
for a legal crime. One demonstration of this concept of personal
responsibility is Raskolnikov's friend Razumihin, who shows that a
person can overcome the negative influences of his environment. An
interesting contrast appears between the protagonist Raskolnikov and his
friend Razumihin. Both are poor university dropouts. However,
Raskolnikov is a political radical with the ideals of a revolutionary.
Razumihin, in contrast, seems fairly content with the political regime,
preferring to work with it, rather than against it. They each have their
own response to poverty: Raskolnikov lives off of his mother's pension
and pawns off his possessions to live day to day, while Razumihin makes
and lives off of his own money. His reputation is that he is remarkably
resourceful and thrifty (54). He anticipates being able to return to the
university (54). Razumihin's diligence contrasts starkly with
Raskolnikov's apathy: after running out of money for his university
education, the latter leaves it and mopes.

The contrast between these two is interesting; from these examples it is
clear that laziness is correlated with radicalism. Raskolnikov desires
to improve society by killing the old pawnbroker, obtaining her money,
and distributing it to the poor. He sees this as pragmatic, and thus
morally justifiable. He had made this argument in a magazine article,
arguing that actions of certain people are justifiable if the action
improves society. Razumihin does not express revolutionary thoughts, and
seems indeed quite unrevolutionary, preferring to improve his situation
through normal, legal efforts. Perhaps Dostoevsky's illustration is to
say that revolutionary socialists are lazy.

However, this explanation does not fully unfold Dostoevsky's thoughts.
Rather, it is also restlessness that leads to radicalism. Raskolnikov
seems restless and unhappy with his situation, while Razumihin seems
somewhat content. It is possible that Raskolnikov's restlessness is what
causes his apathy, as he seems quite hopeless about society, himself,
and his family throughout the novel. Seeing no resolution, he simply
does nothing. Thus, apathy causes restlessness, as apathy results in
inactivity, ultimately resulting in boredom. When people are bored, they
often come up with new, radical ideas. It seems, then, that radicalism
and restlessness are intimately bound together.

Dostoevsky demonstrates the importance of faith, a theme which runs
throughout the novel. Raskolnikov's beliefs seem to constantly change.
He has clearly abandoned traditional morals through his theory of
ethics. However, he seems to believe in God and the biblical account of
Lazarus' resurrection (262). He also tells Sonya that "perhaps, there is
no God at all" in response to her distress at his reasoning on what
would be the fate of her family members. He also calls Sonya a
"religious maniac, worrying that he may become one himself (323-234).
His contradictory relationship with religion is somewhat of an enigma.

However, this enigma is resolved with the hypothesis that he accepts
religion to be able to repent and be redeemed, or, metaphorically,
"resurrected." Dostoevsky clarifies the nature of redemption by often
alluding to the biblical account of Lazarus' resurrection. However,
Raskolnikov also realizes that faith would require confession, which he
is afraid of. He is forced into indecision between redemptive faith at
the cost of confession, and continued skepticism at the cost of
continued life with the psychological burden of an unconfessed sin.

Raskolnikov is afraid of confession because it would result in
punishment for his crime, but he is already inflicting his own
psychological imprisonment upon himself. The police detective Porfiry
takes advantage of this, reasoning that the criminal would be forced by
his own mind to make a confession and even, left to his own devices,
prove his own guilt (337-339). Raskolnikov's personal responsibility and
need for confession are illuminated by his inescapable self-punishment.
Raskolnikov was driven to his crime by anti-religious radicalism and
tortures himself by continuing in irreligion. His only hope of
redemption is a return to Christianity and a belief in the redemption
which is given through both Christ and personal repentance. This
requires a just punishment, but a just punishment is, as Raskolnikov
finds, often more beneficial and even pleasant than the internal turmoil
of living in guilt.

Raskolnikov's first fully transparent confession is to Sonia. This is
quite poignant: two people who have committed great immoralities are
finding redemption in faith, led by each other. Sonia decides to go to
Siberia with Raskolnikov---perhaps this would help her escape her own
unfortunate situation---and Raskolnikov starts on a path to full
repentance. This, however, requires confession to the proper legal
authorities. Raskolnikov also discusses this with Sonia. She helps him
to understand the true importance of confession. Both he and she desire
moral absolution; he can only obtain it by confession.

In their earlier conversation about the raising of Lazarus, Sonia,
despite her own moral failings, becomes Raskolnikov's religious guide.
Her faith is what redeems her; she leads him with it. Her faith, though
Raskolnikov doubts its truth, is genuine and thus can influence him to
to confess. Dostoevsky thus shows that the scientific validity of faith
is ultimately worthless on an eternal scale: scientific theories, no
matter their nature, cannot provide rest and calm to the soul, while a
genuine faith can. This is not to say that Christianity is
scientifically invalid. This seems very much within Dostoevsky's nature
as a conservative Russian: he wishes to emphasize the importance of
Christianity to the well-being of both the society and individuals.
Raskolnikov's confession, while it is not to the Church, is certainly an
act of Christian morality. Thus, Dostoevsky shows even through his
discussion of faith that individual confession is necessary.

While dismantling the popular, radical arguments against the importance
of personal responsibility, Dostoevsky demonstrates the strength of his
thesis by creating an environment that could be quite easily blamed for
crime. While Razumihin can serve as an example of the importance of
personal responsibility, it is still clear that Raskolnikov was heavily
influenced by his environment. Raskolnikov's restlessness was certainly
influenced by his situation; even Porfiry, the conservative voice in the
novel, acknowledges that environment can contribute to crime (258).
Raskolnikov's environment drives him to boredom, and thus to
restlessness and radicalism.

Dostoevsky also shows that environment affects other people. For
example, Nikolay, the painter who made a false confession to the murder
which Raskolnikov committed, has had his own nature changed by the
environment. Porfiry specifically notes that Nikolay's entire
temperament had changed when he moved from the country to St.
Petersburg, forgetting his traditional, though heterodox, religious
beliefs (448-450). This affected his entire personality negatively.

Dostoevsky uses *Crime and Punishment* to show the value of confession
and punishment for redemption. The protagonist, Raskolnikov, only finds
relief from the guilt from murder by confessing his crime and submitting
to a just punishment. Despite his environment, which, it can be argued,
drove him to his crime, the only way that Raskolnikov is able to achieve
redemption and live well is to confess. Dostoevsky answers his opponents
through this apparent weakness which he then completely overcomes by
demonstrating the importance of Christian faith. Though Raskolnikov's
punishment is mercifully lightened, it still fulfills the need for
justice and thus results in redemption.{.dropcap}

## Works Cited

Dostoevsky, Fyodor. *Crime and Punishment*. Translated by Constance
Garnett, Bantam Dell, 2003.{.no-dropcap}
